## Code Book: Getting and Cleaning Data

### Introduction

This Code Book is for the Getting and Cleaning Data project and for the tidy data generated by the script run_analysis.R. The raw data has been processed to generate a tidy data containg the mean values of certain parameters for each subject and for each activity in a combined data set containg the data set of train and test. All the points requested are done by the script.

1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 
5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

### Data Source

A full description is available at the site where the data was obtained:

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

Here are the data for the project:

https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

### Source Files

The source files we use to create the tidy data set are:

- features_info.txt: Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.
- features.txt: List of all features.
- activity_labels.txt: Links the class labels with their activity name.
- train/X_train.txt: Training set.
- train/y_train.txt: Training labels.
- test/X_test.txt: Test set.
- test/y_test.txt: Test labels.

The following files are available for the train and test data. Their descriptions are equivalent.

- train/subject_train.txt: Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for the train data set.
- test/subject_test.txt: Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for the test data set.

### Variables

The tidy data contains the following variables for each observation:

* subject: Identifies the subject who perform the activity. The range is from 1 to 30.
* activity: Denotes the activity done in each measurement. Six activities are include with the tags: "WALKING", "WALKING_UPSTAIRS", "WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS", "SITTING", "STANDING", "LAYING"

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

* tBodyAccXYZ
* tGravityAccXYZ
* tBodyAccJerkXYZ
* tBodyGyroXYZ
* tBodyGyroJerkXYZ
* tBodyAccMag
* tGravityAccMag
* tBodyAccJerkMag
* tBodyGyroMag
* tBodyGyroJerkMag
* fBodyAccXYZ
* fBodyAccJerkXYZ
* fBodyGyroXYZ
* fBodyAccMag
* fBodyAccJerkMag
* fBodyGyroMag
* fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

* mean: Mean value
* std: Standard deviation

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle variable:

* gravityMean
* tBodyAccMean
* tBodyAccJerkMean
* tBodyGyroMean
* tBodyGyroJerkMean

## Appendix: Complete list of Variables

* subject
* activity
* tBodyAccstdX
* tBodyAccstdY
* tBodyAccstdZ
* tGravityAccstdX
* tGravityAccstdY
* tGravityAccstdZ
* tBodyAccJerkstdX
* tBodyAccJerkstdY
* tBodyAccJerkstdZ
* tBodyGyrostdX
* tBodyGyrostdY
* tBodyGyrostdZ
* tBodyGyroJerkstdX
* tBodyGyroJerkstdY
* tBodyGyroJerkstdZ
* tBodyAccMagstd
* tGravityAccMagstd
* tBodyAccJerkMagstd
* tBodyGyroMagstd
* tBodyGyroJerkMagstd
* fBodyAccstdX
* fBodyAccstdY
* fBodyAccstdZ
* fBodyAccJerkstdX
* fBodyAccJerkstdY
* fBodyAccJerkstdZ
* fBodyGyrostdX
* fBodyGyrostdY
* fBodyGyrostdZ
* fBodyAccMagstd
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMagstd
* fBodyBodyGyroMagstd
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMagstd
* tBodyAccmeanX
* tBodyAccmeanY
* tBodyAccmeanZ
* tGravityAccmeanX
* tGravityAccmeanY
* tGravityAccmeanZ
* tBodyAccJerkmeanX
* tBodyAccJerkmeanY
* tBodyAccJerkmeanZ
* tBodyGyromeanX
* tBodyGyromeanY
* tBodyGyromeanZ
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanX
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanY
* tBodyGyroJerkmeanZ
* tBodyAccMagmean
* tGravityAccMagmean
* tBodyAccJerkMagmean
* tBodyGyroMagmean
* tBodyGyroJerkMagmean
* fBodyAccmeanX
* fBodyAccmeanY
* fBodyAccmeanZ
* fBodyAccmeanFreqX
* fBodyAccmeanFreqY
* fBodyAccmeanFreqZ
* fBodyAccJerkmeanX
* fBodyAccJerkmeanY
* fBodyAccJerkmeanZ
* fBodyAccJerkmeanFreqX
* fBodyAccJerkmeanFreqY
* fBodyAccJerkmeanFreqZ
* fBodyGyromeanX
* fBodyGyromeanY
* fBodyGyromeanZ
* fBodyGyromeanFreqX
* fBodyGyromeanFreqY
* fBodyGyromeanFreqZ
* fBodyAccMagmean
* fBodyAccMagmeanFreq
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMagmean
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMagmeanFreq
* fBodyBodyGyroMagmean
* fBodyBodyGyroMagmeanFreq
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMagmean
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMagmeanFreq
* angletBodyAccMeangravity
* angletBodyAccJerkMeangravityMean
* angletBodyGyroMeangravityMean
* angletBodyGyroJerkMeangravityMean
* angleXgravityMean
* angleYgravityMean
* angleZgravityMean
